docs/getting-started.md, before:

---
title: Getting Started
slug: /
---
We currently support the following ways of using Gosling.
- [Create Your Visualization in Gosling Online Editor](#create-your-visualization-in-gosling-online-editor)
- [Load a Gosling Spec From Your Github Gist](#load-a-gosling-spec-from-your-github-gist)
- [Embed Gosling Component in a HTML File](#embed-gosling-component-in-a-html-file)
- [Use Gosling.js in React App](#use-goslingjs-in-react-app)
- [Resources](#resources)

## Create Your Visualization in Gosling Online Editor
You can visit [Online Editor](https://gosling.js.org) to visualize your data directly in the website.

## Load a Gosling Spec From Your Github Gist
1. To load a spec you first have to create a gist with a file named gosling.js* that specifies the spec.
1. You can additionally specify a readme.md file to describe your spec.
1. Also be sure to give your gist a fabulous title. It'll be shown in the gosling editor.
You can then open your visualization at <a>http://<editor_url>/?gist=<github_username>/<gist_id></a>. 
<!-- For example, https://gosling.js.org/?gist=flekschas/e6e388332814886d4d714efd0e88093b -->
For example, https://gosling.js.org/?gist=wangqianwen0418/1cc79f00990806f07b379ae6a7c7b7b3

## Embed Gosling Component in a HTML File
```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="https://unpkg.com/higlass@1.11/dist/hglib.css">
  <script src="https://unpkg.com/react@17/umd/react.production.min.js"></script>
  <script src="https://unpkg.com/react-dom@17/umd/react-dom.production.min.js"></script>
  <script src="https://unpkg.com/pixi.js@6/dist/browser/pixi.min.js"></script>
  <script src="https://unpkg.com/higlass@1.11/dist/hglib.js"></script>
  <script src="https://unpkg.com/gosling.js@0.9.17/dist/gosling.js"></script>
</head>
<body>
  <div id="gosling-container"/>
  <script>
    gosling.embed(
      document.getElementById('gosling-container'),
      {
        "tracks": [{
          "data": {
            "url": "https://server.gosling-lang.org/api/v1/tileset_info/?d=cistrome-multivec",
            "type": "multivec",
            "row": "sample",
            "column": "position",
            "value": "peak",
            "categories": ["sample 1"]
          },
          "mark": "rect",
          "x": { "field": "position", "type": "genomic" },
          "color": { "field": "peak", "type": "quantitative", "legend": true },
          "width": 600,
          "height": 130
        }]
      }
    );
  </script>
</body>
</html>
```

## Use Gosling.js with React

Please visit [gosling-react](https://github.com/gosling-lang/gosling-react) to find detailed instruction on using React.
  
Install `gosling.js` and its dependent libraries:

```sh
yarn add gosling.js higlass pixi.js react@16.13.1 react-dom@16.13.1
```

Add the following stylesheet to your base `html` file:
```html
<head>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="https://unpkg.com/higlass@1.11.3/dist/hglib.css">
</head>
```

Use the Gosling.js' react component to visualize your data:

```js
import { GoslingComponent } from "gosling.js";
function App() {
  return (
    <GoslingComponent spec={yourSpec}/>
  );
}
```

## Resources
- How to set up your own HiGlass server for private data exploration?
   - HiGlass Server: https://github.com/higlass/higlass-server
   - HiGlass Docker: https://github.com/higlass/higlass-docker
- How to prepare your own HiGlass data?
   - HiGlass docs for data preparation: https://docs.higlass.io/data_preparation.html

Commit message:

feat: update react version info

docs/getting-started.md, after:

---
title: Getting Started
slug: /
---
We currently support the following ways of using Gosling.
- [Create Your Visualization in Gosling Online Editor](#create-your-visualization-in-gosling-online-editor)
- [Load a Gosling Spec From Your Github Gist](#load-a-gosling-spec-from-your-github-gist)
- [Embed Gosling Component in a HTML File](#embed-gosling-component-in-a-html-file)
- [Use Gosling.js with React](#use-goslingjs-with-react)
- [Resources](#resources)

## Create Your Visualization in Gosling Online Editor
You can visit [Online Editor](https://gosling.js.org) to visualize your data directly in the website.

## Load a Gosling Spec From Your Github Gist
1. To load a spec you first have to create a gist with a file named gosling.js* that specifies the spec.
1. You can additionally specify a readme.md file to describe your spec.
1. Also be sure to give your gist a fabulous title. It'll be shown in the gosling editor.
You can then open your visualization at <a>http://<editor_url>/?gist=<github_username>/<gist_id></a>. 
<!-- For example, https://gosling.js.org/?gist=flekschas/e6e388332814886d4d714efd0e88093b -->
For example, https://gosling.js.org/?gist=wangqianwen0418/1cc79f00990806f07b379ae6a7c7b7b3

## Embed Gosling Component in a HTML File
```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="https://unpkg.com/higlass@1.11/dist/hglib.css">
  <script src="https://unpkg.com/react@17/umd/react.production.min.js"></script>
  <script src="https://unpkg.com/react-dom@17/umd/react-dom.production.min.js"></script>
  <script src="https://unpkg.com/pixi.js@6/dist/browser/pixi.min.js"></script>
  <script src="https://unpkg.com/higlass@1.11/dist/hglib.js"></script>
  <script src="https://unpkg.com/gosling.js@0.9.17/dist/gosling.js"></script>
</head>
<body>
  <div id="gosling-container"/>
  <script>
    gosling.embed(
      document.getElementById('gosling-container'),
      {
        "tracks": [{
          "data": {
            "url": "https://server.gosling-lang.org/api/v1/tileset_info/?d=cistrome-multivec",
            "type": "multivec",
            "row": "sample",
            "column": "position",
            "value": "peak",
            "categories": ["sample 1"]
          },
          "mark": "rect",
          "x": { "field": "position", "type": "genomic" },
          "color": { "field": "peak", "type": "quantitative", "legend": true },
          "width": 600,
          "height": 130
        }]
      }
    );
  </script>
</body>
</html>
```

## Use Gosling.js with React

Please visit [gosling-react](https://github.com/gosling-lang/gosling-react) to find detailed instruction on using React.


Beginning with version 0.9.30, Gosling now supports React v18. 
If you are using a Gosling version prior to 0.9.30, please continue to use React v16.
  
Install `gosling.js` and its dependent libraries:

```sh
yarn add gosling.js higlass pixi.js react@16.13.1 react-dom@16.13.1
```

Add the following stylesheet to your base `html` file:
```html
<head>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="https://unpkg.com/higlass@1.11.3/dist/hglib.css">
</head>
```

Use the Gosling.js' react component to visualize your data:

```js
import { GoslingComponent } from "gosling.js";
function App() {
  return (
    <GoslingComponent spec={yourSpec}/>
  );
}
```

## Resources
- How to set up your own HiGlass server for private data exploration?
   - HiGlass Server: https://github.com/higlass/higlass-server
   - HiGlass Docker: https://github.com/higlass/higlass-docker
- How to prepare your own HiGlass data?
   - HiGlass docs for data preparation: https://docs.higlass.io/data_preparation.html
